---
layout: post.liquid
title: Lesser known CLR GC Handles
published_date: 2023-12-25 10:00:00 -0800
---

TODO: title idea: interface bounderies in coreclr 
TODO: title idea: .net coreclr architecture: internal implementation details
TODO: title idea: components of coreclr

The a simplified view of the .NET runtime is it contains 3 main components: the garbage collector, the
just-in-time compiler (JIT), and the execution engine:

! TODO: cool diagram of the three main components of the .NET runtime.

There are well-factored interfaces at the boundaries between these components.

! TODO: links to interfaces

! TODO: find all interesting interface boundeties in coreclr. The ones that allow compoents to live in differet DLLs are easy to find. maybe there are intereting interfaces within a DLL?

## GC

The GC receives allocation requests from the EE and returns memory. The EE's finializer thread asks
the GC for what objects are ready to finialize so that the EE can run the finializer.

The .NET GC is a
[tracing garbage collector](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tracing_garbage_collection), so
periodically it has to ask the EE what objects are alive on the stacks of threads and in static
variables. This enables the GC to figure out what objects are alive and which can be collected.


## JIT

## fcall and qcall

## profiler api

## debugger api

## hosting api?

I have personally deleted chuncks of this from CoreCLR. Not repevant to modern .NET.

## Native AOT

TODO: explain how the module design enables interesting remixes like NativeAOT, Crossgen, and SuperPMI.

## !!!! Actual GC handle post

The garbage collector in .NET automatically reclaims memory that is not is use.
To do so, it must know where garbage-collected memory is currently in use.
The .NET garbage collector is a
[tracing garbage collector](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tracing_garbage_collection).
This means it integrates with the the execution engine of the


! TODO: reword to mention tracing garbage collection. Maybe explain execution engine / GC separation or use a different phrasing?

To do so it coordinates with the Execution Engine of the runtime to scan all
thread stacks and all static variables to find the root set of objects.

For case that don't fit nicely into the stack and static variable scanning system,
the GC provides an interface to create GCHandles.
A GC handle allows the EE to explicitly
extend the lifetime of a GC object without participating in the normal GC root
reporting system.

This article describes the different types of GC handles implemented by
[CoreCLR's GC](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/tree/main/src/coreclr/gc).

## Public usable GC handle types

Since the beginning of .NET, 4 types of GC handles have been exposed through the
[`GCHandle` struct](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.gchandle).
The types are documented in the
[`GCHandleType` enum](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.gchandletype).

The key point for the sack of this blog post is the GC handle can either be a
strong or weak reference to an object. Strong handles (`GCHandleType.Normal`
`GCHandleType.Pinned`) prevent the object from being collected. Weak handles
(`GCHandleType.Weak` and `GCHandleType.WeakTrackResurrection`) allow the object
to be collected. When using a weak handle, `GCHandle.Target` will return `null`
after an object has been collected.

Starting with .NET 6, a fifth type was exposed through the
[`DependentHandle` struct](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.dependenthandle).

## No longer used handle types

Since .NET became open source, several features that were originally implemented
in CoreCLR using special GC-handles in C++ were rewritten in C#. This is
possible because C# has gained more low-level performance features. Additionally
by re-writing features in C#, the other .NET runtime like NativeAOT and Mono
can share their implementation.

Briefly, since these handle types don't matter in .NET 8 and beyond, here are
unused handled types
[defined in `gcinterface.h`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/42425673bf16345b1a876eab137093d140a67a16/src/coreclr/gc/gcinterface.h#L337).

-   `HNDTYPE_VARIABLE`: a handle that can change between the 4 public handle types.
    [According to CLR architect Jan Kotas](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/discussions/86840),
    "the variable GC handles were used for WinRT/COM interop in .NET Native for UWP for a period of time".
-   `HNDTYPE_ASYNCPINNED`: previously used to implement the pinning behavior in the
    [`Pack` method of `System.Threading.Overlapped`](<https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.overlapped.pack?view=net-8.0#system-threading-overlapped-pack(system-threading-iocompletioncallback-system-object)>).
    [Rewritten in C#](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/74532) in .NET 8.
-   `HNDTYPE_SIZEDREF`: never used in open source .NET to the best of my knowledge.
    It is [used](https://github.com/microsoft/referencesource/blob/51cf7850defa8a17d815b4700b67116e3fa283c2/mscorlib/system/gc.cs#L573)
    in .NET Framework for some caching APIs to estimate memory size
    of an object graph. See [here](https://github.com/microsoft/referencesource/blob/51cf7850defa8a17d815b4700b67116e3fa283c2/System.Web/Cache/SRef.cs#L11)
    and [here](https://github.com/microsoft/referencesource/blob/51cf7850defa8a17d815b4700b67116e3fa283c2/System.Runtime.Caching/System/Caching/SRef.cs#L14).
-   `HNDTYPE_WEAK_NATIVE_COM`: This handle type was used the `WeakReference` class.
    It acts similarly to a normal weak handle, but it can store some extra data.
    If you put a COM object (specifically a runtime callable wrapper) into a
    `WeakReference`, and the COM object implement the WinRT interface
    [`IWeakReferenceSource`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/weakreference/nn-weakreference-iweakreferencesource),
    this handle type will be used to also store the `IWeakReference` returned by
    `GetWeakReference`. When the object is requested from the handle and the
    managed runtime-callable-wrapper has already been garbage collected,
    the runtime will attempt to recreate a RCW from the `IWeakReference`.
    This was [rewritten in C# in .NET 8](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/77196).

## Reference-counted handle

The only handle type we have not yet mentioned is `HNDTYPE_REFCOUNTED`.
This behaves as either a strong or weak-track-resurrection handle. To determine
whether the handle is strong, the GC asks the execution engine if the handle
is strong or not. Specifically it calls the execution engine provided method
[`RefCountedHandleCallbacks`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/0faecd57200db0562797c616352f503ed1c6adc7/src/coreclr/gc/gcinterface.ee.h#L231).

This simple but powerful interface is currently used by the interop systems in
.NET. For COM interop, the VM can extend the lifetime of a managed object as long
as the COM-callable-wrapper referencing it has a non-zero reference count.

For Objective-C marshal, this type of handle is used to extend the lifetime of
a managed object that has been exposed to Objective-C as long as its retain count
is non-zero. The ability to create this type of handle is exposed through
[`ObjectiveCMarshal.CreateReferenceTracking`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.objectivec.objectivecmarshal.createreferencetrackinghandle),
but you probably will not need to call this API directly. The higher-level Objective-C
interop system takes care of calling it for you.

## An example of how ref-counted handles can be used in a .NET runtime

In the NativeAOT form factor of .NET, the user program is fully precompiled to
native code. Compared to CoreCLR and Mono, much more of the runtime is
implemented in C#. This makes it easier to pull code samples from. We will look
at how the COM wrappers system in NativeAOT uses ref-counted handles.

The COM wrappers system in NativeAOT allows a program to expose a managed object
as an unmanaged COM object. To do this, the runtime generates a managed object
wrapper. As long as the managed object wrapped has a non-zero reference count,
the managed object it wraps needs to stay alive.

> Note that the code samples here are simplified somewhat from the actual
> implementation. See [ComWrappers.NativeAot.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/coreclr/nativeaot/System.Private.CoreLib/src/System/Runtime/InteropServices/ComWrappers.NativeAot.cs)
> for the full details.

The `ManagedObjectWrapper` struct is allocated from unmanaged memory. It implements
the basic 3 three methods defined
by COM's IUnknown interface: `AddRef`, `Release` and `QueryInterface`. How they
are exposed to COM callers is outside the scope of this article. It also holds
a ref-counted GCHandle.

```c#
internal unsafe struct ManagedObjectWrapper
{
    // This is GC ref-counted Handle
    public volatile IntPtr HolderHandle;
    ulong RefCount;

    public bool IsRooted => RefCount != 0;

    public uint AddRef()
    {
        return Interlocked.Increment(ref RefCount);
    }

    public uint Release()
    {
        return Interlocked.Decrement(ref RefCount);
    }

    public unsafe int QueryInterface(in Guid riid, out IntPtr ppvObject)
    {
      // ...
    }
}
```

Note the `IsRooted` property which indicates whether there is a non-zero
reference count.

The ref-counted GCHandle that the `ManagedObjectWrapper` holds points to a
`ManagedObjectWrapperHolder`. This is a managed object that is used to store
a reference to the wrapped obect and manage the lifetime of the unmanaged
`ManagedObjectWrapper`.

```c#
internal unsafe class ManagedObjectWrapperHolder
{
    static ManagedObjectWrapperHolder()
    {
        delegate* unmanaged<IntPtr, bool> callback = &IsRootedCallback;
        RuntimeImports.RhRegisterRefCountedHandleCallback((nint)callback, typeof(ManagedObjectWrapperHolder).GetEEType());
    }

    [UnmanagedCallersOnly]
    static bool IsRootedCallback(IntPtr pObj)
    {
        // We are paused in the GC, so this is safe.
        ManagedObjectWrapperHolder* holder = (ManagedObjectWrapperHolder*)&pObj;
        return holder->_wrapper->IsRooted;
    }

    private ManagedObjectWrapper* _wrapper;
    private object _wrappedObject;

    public ManagedObjectWrapperHolder(ManagedObjectWrapper* wrapper, object wrappedObject)
    {
        _wrapper = wrapper;
        _wrappedObject = wrappedObject;
        _wrapper->HolderHandle = RuntimeImports.RhHandleAllocRefCounted(this);
    }

    ~ManagedObjectWrapperHolder()
    {
      NativeMemory.Free(_wrapper);
      _wrapper = null;
    }

    // ...
}
```

The holder object has two purposed. As the target of the ref-counted handle,
as long as there is an unmanaged reference count, it will keep the wrapped object
alive. And when the holder


## Footnotes

https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/gc-handles/

> The GC knows where memory is at all times. It knows this because it knows where memory isn't reachable. By subtracting where memory is reachable from it isn't, or where it isn't reachable from where it is, it obtains a condemned set. The collector subsystem uses the condemned set to generate corrective commands to drive the memory use from a state where it is in use to a state where it isn't, and arriving at a state where it wasn't, it now is.
